today we're looking at podcast creation
apps audio boot and spreaker radio and
then we'll dig just a little bit deeper
to learn some of the tricks for
recording audio on Android all that in a
time 30 minutes today on the App clinic
so what is a podcast creation act yeah I
was wondering that myself because I know
about podcast abs and when I first saw
that that this is what we were doing I
thought oh let me bring out you know
beyondpod dog catcher and all my
favorite it's a popular category but
this is different these apps often will
let you listen to a podcast but they're
really geared towards the creator of the
podcast absolutely so it's an
interesting idea it's this notion that
you have a phone it has a microphone a
lot of the times when you want to be
creating cool content to share with
people you're going to be out and about
why not do that on your phone sure so
there's actually not a huge number of
podcast creation apps out there or at
least not that I could find so we're
gonna have a look at a couple today
which have been around for a little
while and look at what they've done what
they've done right what they could have
done better and then dig a little bit
deeper and maybe share some of that
knowledge as to how you can create an
app which does something similar
particularly because it seems like it
may be an underserved market so let's
have a look at the key sort of features
for podcasting so the the central things
which you're going to need record audio
sure if that seems like a fairly
straightforward but not just record
audio this is really important because
the way that these apps differ from
normal recording app is that they need
to record a lot of audio they need to
stay recording for a very long period of
time absolutely and of course you need
to be able to do that audio playback and
not just for the podcast which you
create but also for other podcasts from
the community which you generally
belonging yeah I wouldn't say that's an
absolute necessity but it seems to be a
really popular feature yeah I think it's
a it helps you become a better part of
that community of you understand some of
the things which other people are doing
help be inspired absolutely I wouldn't
mind seeing a little bit on playback in
terms of effects and you know being able
to jump to different places in the
podcast being
to mark times I mean there's a lot of
there's a big wish list that i would
have one of these apps it's some of the
stuff which we've got covered here in
sort of podcasting + + Anna so it's
signing in with Google+ cuz away from
google and we like that is people plus a
lot kind of handy femme and of course
you can insert the social network of
your choice here as long as it's
supported on the vast majority of all
android phones precisely you know
google+ is because of the way we do
login on android i would also be
interesting you the whole point of doing
podcasts on your phone which is arguably
not the the best platform for a
recording audio is that you can do it
while you're on the go so having some
more integration with geolocation
mappings that you can see where these
broadcasts are coming from it could be
really nice absolutely and finally
exactly what aim was referring to some
some more device editing so being able
to trim the beginning and endings off
your podcast being able to do some audio
audio manipulation i think would be a
real win now one thing that a lot of
people miss on this now I've worked in
the professional audio recording space
for video games for a long time and one
of the most important features that
consumer apps don't have that Pro ops
generally do is what we call punch in
punch out and the idea that you could
just hit a button and say I'm recording
now and then hit another button and
either say I'm not recording but I'm
going to again or what's even more
important is to be able to press a
button say I want to remember this place
so either that's some place where I
messed up and I wanted to edit that out
or it's something that I did really well
and I want to be able to emphasize that
or I want to be able to put a bookmark
there that sort of functionality would
be really really cool to see in these
apps and it wouldn't be all that
difficult to deliver in a in a mobile
form factor awesome so we're going to
take a closer look at two apps today the
beat the beta version of audio boo to a
sequel to audio boot and spreaker or
radio now that's not speaker radio no
buts ricker radio that's right exactly
because spreaker is a completely
different word and is not Pennsylvania
Dutch as I had it and assumed heed not
in fact I probably just wanna look that
up on your
Jeanette's to find out the the exact
definition because we can't see it here
its own principal it's just yeah we
can't we can't do it so audioboo is an
app that I remember from my days as a
developer advocate back in London I got
to know the team behind audioboo v1
pretty well as they were sort of
navigating the waters of audio recording
and processing on Android back in the v1
1 point 2 days which is a 1.1 just a
long way back now so I know they're
going to be pretty happy to get some
candid feedback on this beta of version
2 now keep in mind that this is a beta
so there's likely to be plenty of rough
edges and spoilers there are but
generally speaking you know that's the
best time to really give that sort of
feedback and I'm sure that they would
appreciate that feedback directly if any
of you guys to choose to check it out
now first off I'm not a huge fan of the
icon or the feature page and now there's
a pretty good chance that they've left
it this way on purpose because they're
in beta and they're not ready to reveal
their sort of a new modern branding but
even still users are going to form an
early opinion of that up from the first
time that they use it even if it is in
beta so it's worth getting this right
kind of straight away now I do like
their feature graphic I think that it's
actually kind of nice and clean and it
pretty much says exactly what the what
the app is about the problem is that
they've reused that feature graphic for
the icon which is completely
inappropriate it's tough to because
they're using that sort of generic
microphone yes symbol which it says
recording but it doesn't say audioboo
recording exactly it's interesting
because they've used a lot of their own
in English random throughout the app the
things that you record aren't podcast
they aren't anything else they are booze
just makes sense but if you're going to
have that kind of branding you want to
make that rich right from the outset to
try and provide that consistency now
personally I would love to see a richer
feature graphic in disagrees but i think
the icon i think we can both agree could
do with some be great to see an icon
that's a distinctive silhouette maybe
building on the microphone I time but
making it their own exactly so let's
dive in and take a bit of a look at the
app and now the first time that you
start the app to presented with a
walkthrough and you can see the first
page of the walk
there's a few issues related to that you
can see straight away that the Android
that the design language here is
decidedly non-android we've got buttons
which don't look like Android buttons
and in fact we've got three very similar
but subtly different button Styles all
on this front page and to make things a
little more confusing as a user I'm
presented with four options when I open
this out for the first time now I'm not
actually in the app but i already have
to choose do i want to record a boo I
don't know what that is yet but that's
an option do I want to listen to the
welcome message do I swipe to be able to
read through the walkthrough or skip the
walkthrough now that's a lot of
decisions to have to make when I launch
the app before I'm actually doing
anything so i'd recommend reducing this
to as close to zero as possible so in my
mind the best apps present you with the
UI that lets you get started straight
away no interstitials no walkthroughs no
explanations walkthroughs a particularly
problematic because it really suggests
that your app needs careful instructions
to be able to understand how it needs to
be used now I'm not sure that that's the
case for an app like this you would
think if someone's gone to the trouble
of downloading it they get the general
idea this is an app to be able to record
audio and share it online and I'd like
to think that you could get to that
process much more quickly than having to
go through all of these steps and
walkthroughs beforehand so here I
skipped through the walkthrough and it's
asked me to sign in and once again I've
got like a thousand options do i login
do I register have I forgotten my
password maybe I want to sign in with
twitter or maybe I want to browse
without signing in now all of these
things are on the page most of them have
slightly different UI elements that
there's four buttons but they're in two
different colors does that mean anything
do the different colored buttons
represent a different kind of choice if
I've forgotten my password that's a link
so there's all of these different ways
of being able to proceed and it can be
quite confronting to a new user to try
to figure out I just I just want to get
to the app now I should point out that
both the first screen in this screen
both have a button that will just let
you skip forward to the actual app
itself but it's kind of buried amongst
all this other stuff so again here I'd
really suggest that you try and cut that
as much as possible make it as simple as
you can make that login process as
simple as you can and possibly put that
further into your app once you get to
the point where they need to be logged
in to do something now again in terms of
you I you've got some very non-standard
Android controls on screen and I noticed
that even the text views a custom they
don't actually display the cursor
position when I have them selected and
it's worth noting that the buttons
themselves don't respond visibly to
being touched so again you press the
button nothing happens until you let go
and you'll take into the next to the
next screen and again I'd kind of like
to see Google+ sign-in available as an
option here now once i get through all
of this i get to an empty screen with a
loading dialogue I've already spent
several minutes clicking through logins
looking through walk through so it seems
that by this point there I've spent a
lot of time it should have been enough
time for prefetch enough data so that
these first screens can pop up instantly
and have the data that you want so you
want to take advantage of that startup
time particularly if you have logins
walk there is anything like that to
pre-populate the data at least the first
page and anything within a click of that
first landing page you can also probably
notice that along the bottom here
there's some buttons and they're totally
blank i'm guessing thats related to some
sort of custom control that they've
built and it's not rendering properly
again one of the risks of building
things from scratch when there's
perfectly good built-in framework
components which do that same thing for
you on the top they have tabs that
aren't really tabs I can't swipe between
them there's a bright pink record tab
that's in the middle which makes me
think that's what's selected it isn't
it's also not a tab it's a shortcut to
the record screen and I can see what
they're doing here it's the most
important thing so you make that big and
bright but again it's not obvious what's
happening here it's it's not a button
that's a tab it looks like the tab is
selected and so I'm confused how do i
how do I get it to record something so
again you want to think about that
design language think about what a new
user is going to think and an easy way
to do this is to give this app to
someone who you've told nothing about
what it is preferably someone who's not
very good with computers or smartphones
and see how they react do they click the
right button to begin with and use
analytics to see how this goes
particularly something like beta I'm
hoping that the team here is using
analytics
find out which of their features are
discoverable now on the plus side we've
got the ability to listen to community
recordings track our own recordings but
again you need to wait for each of these
lists to load before they get displayed
so as I click through this tabs I get
that same loading page and every time I
click I get the same loading page again
so you want to do some caching you want
to do some prefetching to make sure that
all of this stuff kind of happens in the
background without you having to sit
there and wait for it now if we move on
to the meat of the app the recording
screener as in christened it earlier
today the confidence screen same issues
here a non-standard buttons multitude of
options has three buttons to press here
really I just want to record and then
finish recording as it happens only the
pores and record button is really
relevant until I'm done unless you're
providing functionality like punching
punch out that Ian was describing
earlier so it makes sense not to confuse
the UI with options that aren't really
relevant or available to me yet now I
like the countdown clock combined with
the counter and the dot matrix view to
see the audio levels looks quite nice
but I'd love to see them go a couple of
steps further with this firstly change
the bounce animation so right now as
you're recording audio it's basically a
triangle that's going to go up or down
depending on the audio level I'd like to
see something like a spectrum light
spectral analyzer so I can see you know
which frequencies are being recorded
it's kind of non-trivial to implement
but it looks really awesome so it's
something which I may be worth looking
at I think well do you want to have a
spectrum with more elements than 16 not
necessarily I think he could do a 69
would be fine you just want something
that usually did it might be a spectral
analyzer I was I was trying some
different fridges it's hard to do with
your voice but I think I noticed a few
differences I think they actually might
be doing a like a Fourier transform on
that that would be kind of cool it would
be I will have to investigate further or
perhaps the audio boob guys can reach
out and let us know if I'm just being an
idiot yeah we'll talk about that later
yeah it's generally the KPD apart yeah
absolutely he also pointed out how nice
it would be to see the audio levels or
the times that I confirm the things that
I've been recording have actually been
recording so basically just that volume
but over a period of time to see how it
all go
and again if you take it to that next
step and provide some ability to do
edits to do punching punch outs it's a
really easy way for you to be able to
see where those different segments of
your Oreo are now once i'm done i have
this awesome button at the top which is
a slave / delete button which is quite a
dichotomy and I'd really strongly
suggest that you separate these it's
very unlikely that anyone is going to be
particularly comfortable hitting a
button that says either save or delete
it's a 50-50 chance we'll see what
happens that said the recording itself
seemed to work pretty well I didn't
notice any issues I think Ian you said
that there was some cut outs when you
were doing some testing well I did get a
drop out on playback but I think that's
actually a reported bug for jb4 point to
point to that there are some cases where
audio track or open SL can drop the last
few milliseconds of a track that's
interesting yeah so I didn't notice any
problems it could very well be our fault
but anyway in any case that all seemed
to work pretty well and I really love to
see like I said that ability to start to
trim the start and ends of my booze
before I upload them and publish them
online so overall it's an interesting
app shows a lot of promise of it also
needs a lot of work particularly on the
UI UX to make it more responsive simpler
easier to get started and overall it
really just needs to take a close look
at the Android design guidelines and see
if you can make it a little bit more
consistent with that sort of way of
interfacing with users spreaker fails
test one with a complete lack of feature
graphic the icon is pretty good though
the iphone is pretty good love to see
them go the whole way drop the box and
use the distinctive silhouette
exclusively because that is a very
distinctive silhouette it's kind of nice
right you can see it here you've got
that black silhouette with the this
brooker spreaker as too many words which
sound like that man on a sort of logo
built into the head into the headphones
which is quite neat so they've got a
couple of really neat branding elements
here and I'd love to see them just focus
on that and exclude the rest now of
course we've done a great favour to the
spreaker team and previewed the
silhouette only version of
icon automatically on the on the bottom
of our page here not nothing right now
but yeah it just came with yeah they did
happen to use the same color of chroma
key green that we use for our the
transparency here so let's say let's
take a look at how that would look there
we go yeah so that's exactly the way
which we think it should look is just
like this right with retouch man behind
well exactly you know that that can help
to really reinforce the branding my hand
um so we have a welcome screen here
which tells us everything we probably
already knew before we downloaded it
from google play and unfortunately there
is a menu button of shame menu button
does absolutely nothing which is
unfortunate looking at the app once I
spent a bit of time in there I realize
this is probably an app that hasn't
really been touched since probably
somewhere around the gingerbread days so
I'm not going to dwell on that too much
particularly as the developers here
didn't self nominate they didn't ask for
the for candid feedback so I'm not going
to be too harsh but it's definitely an
example of we've got an app which was
launched much earlier on in the life
cycle you don't want to abandon that you
don't want to launch and forget mobile
phones Android in particular the UX has
really taken a step forward over the
last few releases so it's it's a good
opportunity to go back update those apps
and we've seen several apps that we've
looked at on the App clinic grocery IQ I
think being the most notable that I can
recall which have done a complete hollow
based UX redesign recently and I think
it really shows how effective that can
be so once we get past that we can't
continue without signing in which is
unfortunate as it's going to alienate a
lot of users who aren't willing to
create yet another account or login with
the particular social media option that
you have available so at the very least
I again I would like to see google plus
some of the you know basically just
having one social media network it is a
choice but in this instance it means
that I need to to choose to either
create a new account or login with
with a particular social media so I
struggled actually you know as it
happens I really struggled to actually
get into the app and most users won't
really have the patience for that it
took a whole bunch of having to jump
through hoops and then create the
accounts and then it sent me an email
and then I had to have responded to the
email before I could actually log in on
the phone it was kind of painful so you
want to avoid that kind of pain wherever
possible once we get into the app itself
again most of the features are very
similar to audioboo you xui issues which
are from an older version of android not
going to dwell on that the confidence
recording screen here you can see that
there you is is fairly non-standard in a
way that isn't a bad thing but for UI
features like buttons and drop downs
there's really a lot to gain by sticking
to the standard rather than going your
own way or trying to implement your own
versions of that the recording
experience is actually pretty similar to
what we saw in audioboo so I really
offer a lot of the same feedback and
again here we would like to see more
than just the amplification but
something which gives you an idea of how
the reporting is going over time the
frequency is being recorded now so
that's particularly important for
spreaker who's model is live broadcasts
rather the pre-recorded podcast the idea
here is that it's more like a live radio
station that you fire up you do your
thing and people tuned in life rather
than downloading podcasts to listen to
so keep that pretty short I think we we
can probably turn to in our resident
audio expert who has some tips for how
you can assure that your audio recording
works and is the kind of quality that
you really need it to be on Android but
thanks for a deal let's see if we can
get this working oh look at me awesome
alright so on the surface recording on
Android is dead simple it hasn't changed
for years you create an audio record
object and then you call read in a loop
and reid returns a buffer full of audio
samples and you take those samples and
write them to some kind of persistent
storage at the same time you probably
want to use those samples or some boiled
down version of them to create that
confidence UI which is either that you
know bouncing led type of thing
hang or maybe a little wave for for
spectral analyzer just something to let
your user know that something's actually
happening I but it turns out that we
have the same problem that we have in
audio in general when we're doing
recording and that's the problem of
latency I usually when we talk about
latency in audio we're talking about the
latency in the audio drivers and
hardware which is usually measured in
this relatively small number of
milliseconds now for some devices that
might be hundreds of milliseconds but
still work we're talking about a
fraction of a second but for recording
we actually have a different problem
especially for the type of recording
that we're doing where the audio is not
going to fit into the RAM of the device
it's not going to fit into the Hebe
allocated to your application it's going
to need to go into persistent storage or
onto the network somewhere other than
where it is right now so in that case
we're talking about a latency number
that can get very very large up into the
multiple second so I actually sat down
with John Michell trivia and Glen cast
and two of our audio engineers this
morning and we you know had a Yap about
the old times and talked about recording
on Android and this is one of the things
that I hadn't realized but Glen said on
the Nexus 7 he could actually measure
three to four seconds of latency going
from memory to persistent storage in
that case to a flash memory so we're
actually talking about a very long
period of time now once things get
started the flash memory is capable of
writing just as fast as the microphone
is producing data much faster actually
but it takes a while to get started so
of course we need to fix this with our
old friend threads and extra buffers its
way if we fix every audio problem is
with a little bit of extra buffering so
here's how we do it we want to have one
thread that is dedicated to recording
the way that the audio record API is set
up you really don't have a choice on
this
audio record first is a blocking API
when you call read it will block until
the data has been read second it's not a
guaranteed delivery API in other words
if you don't call read often enough you
simply will miss data the data will just
go off to some other app or or into the
bit bucket and you won't read it all so
you get a drop out so you want one
thread that's doing nothing but call
read over and over and over again that's
the record thread in this diagram so
every time it gets a buffer does two
things first it's going to pass it off
to a write buffer which is going to be a
very very long buffer that's being read
by another thread the storage thread the
second thing it's going to do is pass
some version of that audio data off to
the UI thread so that it can create the
confidence you I and usually this is
going to either be you know RMS level or
it's going to be a spectral analysis or
just something to let us know that
things are still happening of course if
the latency on the SD card is very high
then you're going to end up with an
awful lot of data stacked up in the
right buffer and software being what it
is sooner or later you're going to get
into a situation where it won't all fit
now if you're running into this
condition a lot that means you probably
made you write buffer is too small and
you're going to need to enlarge it but
even with the biggest write buffer in
the world someone somewhere on some
device is going to end up running out of
space you know maybe they're running too
much in the background maybe the SD card
is filling up or you know maybe there's
an abundance of cosmic rays in the in
their neck of the woods and all their
devices are beginning to inexplicably
fail you know whatever the condition
you're you need to be prepared for it so
how do you do that well when you run out
of record thread space so in other words
when when the record thread can't write
to the right buffer anymore that's when
you need to signal a drop out to the UI
thread so there's two lessons here you
know first is that you need to make sure
that whatever you're using for a write
buffer it has the ability to handle a a
single writer single
reader multi-threaded case and it has
some size that it can signal back when
it's full to the right thread so that
you don't or so that you can detect
these dropout cases and then you just
you know you want to turn your UI red or
whatever it is that's going to let your
user know that some audio is going to
miss that way they can either stop the
recording and try again or whatever
action they want to take now there's a
number of other things you can do to
make this sort of app better we don't
have time to go over all of them in
depth but let's talk about just a couple
for instance right to already mentioned
that running a simple Fourier transform
even just an eight or sixteen element
transform over your audio will let you
do a little bit of spectral analysis
doing an even more or larger Fourier
transform with maybe 256 elements would
let you do things like show whether
there is excessive noise in the input
signal which could be really useful in a
mobile app or you might want to use the
new mediacodec api that came out in
jellybean and you could use that to
access the flac encoder or the mp3
encoder so that what you write to
persistent storage is smaller you don't
have to do as much processing because
that's a possibly a hardware accelerated
stage I don't actually think that for
audio it is but it could be in any case
I we're talking about things that take a
lot of processing power not just
spectral analysis but perhaps multiband
compression or automatic gain control
all of these things will make your audio
recording sound significantly more
professional we don't have any samples
ourselves in the Android group that
would show you how to take advantage of
the processing power on a mobile device
for this type of audio but you know
before the show I googled render script
and audio and came up with a bunch of
github projects from people who have
done this exact thing using renderscript
a render script has the benefit that it
works on pretty much all android
platforms now it doesn't require you to
know anything about the underlying
architecture and it's really super fast
for doing the sorts of things that
you're likely to do when you're trying
to process a podcast so I encourage you
to take a look into that if you're
looking for professional audio features
with that back to rato so our next step
is to take a closer look at today's apps
and see how close they are to being pure
Android now I think given the place that
each of them are particularly audioboo
being in beta and spreaker being I think
an app which hasn't been updated
particularly recently in terms of UI and
UX that they're probably a little
distance from that but we would suggest
to those developers to start by going
through each of these checklists
particularly while you're still embedded
to find out how much closer you can get
to being pure and 0 and really make that
launched a success until then you can
find our pure Android collection a bit
ly / pure Android and you can nominate
your app for consideration by adding it
to our trailer page by searching for App
clinic Trello you'll see there exactly
what topics we have planned for the next
few weeks in fact tomorrow not tomorrow
next week we are going to be
experimenting with the app clinic by
holding a special session for the
members of the Prague google developers
group so we're going to be recording
that early next week and putting it
online a few guys to check out sometime
after that this is a new initiative that
we're going to try out to try and get
some of these GD geez more involved for
the process here so if you are a part of
a GD g or run a GD g let us know and
we'll see if we can include you in the
schedule all right we'll be back later
in the week to look at what is later in
the week whether I think we're looking
at whether us we are looking at weather
apps and the Android design in action is
also i'm not sure that's ok so i think
the design in action team should also be
looking at whether i'm not sure if Roman
is going to be available so maybe Nick
and Adam taking a look at weather
but will low excellent check in with
them and find out sounds good well until
next week I'm array tomo and I'm Ian new
Lewis and this has been the app clinic